---
name: Ben Hwang
year: 2019
avatar: /assets/images/2019/ben-hwang.jpg
order: 0
---
It’s hard to know where to start. \Art has been such an incredible experience, and one that has taken so many turns that I feel like we could write volumes about our journey. Despite this, and the number of times we made those turns and pivoted to new ideas, we eventually made it! And I am so proud of what we were able to accomplish. I learned so much about the artistic process--and subsequently how it interacts and sometimes clashes with the common engineering mindset. I also internalized what it takes to shape a singular concept and a plethora of ideas into a polished piece of art.

In this case that singular concept was the implications of the Chinese Social Credit System and how modern technologies enabled its conception. This in itself is a huge concept to explore and it led us to so many different ideas of how to express it. We explored abstract data visualization techniques to try and represent data that might be used to judge people’s credit score. We also implemented different generative art techniques blending Chinese propaganda with Medieval Catholic Imagery using various Neural Network Architectures. And we even made instagram bots trying to craft internet personas as reflected by the ads served to them. It took many attempts and tries, but eventually we landed on building Machine Learning powered 3D humanoids in the game engine Unity. Even at this point we weren’t all convinced or assured that this would finally bear the clear vision that we sought. But with much determination and trial we made the initial models work and provided a technical foundation for Ying’s design chops to really shine. I’ll always remember the day when Ying finished the first 3D model for us to use in Unity. After months of wondering when we would figure this out, we finally had some semblance of what this piece could be, and how awesome it would become.

Lastly, I like to think that if this pandemic didn’t happen, we may have actually continued on working and finding ways to continue making art + tech projects happen. But we cannot change what happened, and we as a team made the best of what we had. Working with Ying and Michael throughout the year and especially during the start of the pandemic made me appreciate how awesome they are and how much fun working with them has been! They were both excellent mentors in their respective fields and our endless conversations and exchanges were second to none. They really are what made this experience great. And although the project is over--for now--I hope to carry on the spirit of this fellowship in my own creative pursuits in music and wherever else life leads.