---
name: Jacob Lee
year: 2018
avatar: /assets/images/2018/jacob-lee.jpg
order: 0
---
It was a great journey. In all honesty, I’m happy that we could finish. From the outset, our goals were ambitious, and there were many moments when it felt like we were running on empty and the finish line was just a mirage. In order to move forward, we had to put out multiple fires at once, but occasionally our prototype actually caught on fire to remind us of that. Seeing how calm and elegant the piece looks now almost makes me forget about the complexity and the struggle of its genesis. And that amply captures the primary technical goal, which was to serve the visual metaphor. We wanted to breathe life into this piece and generate randomness, yet the software components were inherently about normalization. This tension between the natural and the artificial was the challenge for us. We attempted to engineer something that feels alive with inorganic parts.

Collaborating with Mika was a great learning process. We started the work with visual examples. For instance, Mika shared a scene from The Terminator and set the liquid metal moving around in the scene as the gold standard. And that became the starting point for technical research. After a long sequence of searches on Google, we arrived at a few promising methods to simulate liquid and control its properties such as viscosity. Subsequently, we conducted experiments to validate them. There was a lot of creativity in this process. How to randomize the liquid movements had many possibilities, yet choosing Chaos Theory and the Navier-Stokes equations as the theoretical foundation was a circuitous decision after a long exploration of different ideas. Further, the focus on visual effects was a bit unusual as a technical constraint to deal with since performance is the priority in most software projects. Most of the time, the results were disappointing, but a small subset was successful and accumulated to a more sophisticated and cohesive product.

In retrospect, there were a few notable technical challenges. Firstly, we strived to use theories as metaphors for their corresponding visual effects. One of the themes we wanted to capture was clustering and visualizing connections that we as humans can’t see. So in visualizing the dataset, we applied dimensionality reduction techniques such as t-SNE as their purpose was aligned with the theme. Once we had the theoretical foundation, we needed a way to iterate quickly to create a feedback loop with Mika. It needed to be mainly visual for Mika to review. Processing was the perfect platform since it supported live interaction and visual feedback. We were able to increase productivity significantly after adopting the platform. Towards the end of the project, integrating all the different components was a considerably challenging task. It was essentially mapping the output from one module into the input for another module, which turned out to be a more creative and philosophical task. Further, since we had to wait for the hardware development, we had to predict the real-life visuals with the software. When the hardware was connected, we noticed that the simulation wasn’t an accurate representation of the final result due to the limits on the communication protocol. Particularly, we had to ensure that both the hardware and software could maintain a certain frame rate. Lastly, the piece was to be displayed for 8 hours at a time, so we had to test the program for its stability. We noticed that it kept crashing after an hour of running and later discovered that there was a memory leak. After resolving this issue, the piece was mostly ready for production. 

Partaking in this project made me think deeper about the purpose of technology. In this project, enabling visual metaphors was its main purpose. Nonetheless, I’m convicted to think in this way more broadly beyond this project. Using technology to enable processes and help people is the priority. Technology is there to serve, and the magical experience comes when one can’t notice it seamlessly operating in the background. 

In summary, I’m grateful that I had the opportunity to be part of this collaborative project. I want to thank Mika et al. from Tajima Studio, Christy, Greg, J, everyone at \Art, and Ezer and Johnny from Brooklyn Research for being part of this project. The amazing result was only possible through everyone’s contribution. It was a truly unique educational experience that I will look back on many times later.