---
name: Kelly Sun
year: 2020
avatar: /assets/images/2020/kelly-sun.png
order: 1
---
This year's effort is significantly different from the former projects: we are actually developing software tools that assist the artists' performance. Instead of creating a finite, discrete, single piece of art, we shift our perspective onto reimagining and transforming the way to interact with and engage an audience, from both artists' and audience's viewpoints. This is correspondingly reflected from our two projects, Tohuwabohu and Otherwards.

I figure the subjects we are exploring have an optimistic view towards technology and they fit perfectly into my personal definition of technology: the purpose of technology is to increase efficiency. Tohuwabohu serves as a one-stop-shop for file manipulation and its use cases can be elaborate to all types of presentation activity. The integration of MIDI opens the possibility of using the software as an instrument too, non-linear launching and playback controls has the potential to bring sensorimotor inputs together like "visual DJ-ing". (It doesn't sound like much but I'm secretly thinking this is super cool, for example I would love to try using it to create some glitchy visuals accompanying Death Grips' jarring exponential soundscapes!! But of course they are very creative and their visuals are superb enough.)

For Otherwards, the inception of the concept cannot be more in time considering the state of the world. We are already mentally and emotionally isolated for years (ironically thanks to technology), and now people start to realize this fact as we are also physically isolated. Otherwards creates a way to reconvene ourselves to engage in music experiences and in the physical world by introducing some "obstacles" (you have to physically move to explore more sounds), very clever. Personally I find this concept fascinating, because as we have so much resources for music (also everything) today, I find myself essentially stopping the exploring process. It's such a shame that ultimate efficiency breeds inertia and I'm so nostalgic about digging out the gems by myself. By introducing a little bit of inefficiency, I'm surprised that we are able to regain the momentum of discovery. 

Contrasting with previous years' effort, the process of creating these tools are not too different from normal "techy" software development life cycle: we had a comparatively straightforward goal, the steps and milestones are more or less clearly laid out, every now and then we catch up to do a stand-up and some feature iterations. What is different from before though, is we are working with non-technical members and effort is needed to introduce everyone to the product management part of the picture as well as to adapt quickly to the unchanging truth of constant changes regarding needs and use cases. In this sense, I'm really being a product manager and a software engineer at the same time!

I hate to relate any hardship to the pandemic cliche even remotely, but it is the culprit of a smaller project scope and a fairly chaotic workflow. With a ton of plans being disturbed, our team works mostly in async mode, especially as Bil and I are leading two separate projects. This means, again in company terms, we are the on-call person 24/7 for our corresponding project. This can be quite stressful when I learn React or Unity or digging into MIDI controllers for the very first time where I'm the only point-of-contact in researching and solving problems. I'd say going through the project in this fashion gains me more patience and composure when facing challenges, as well as confidence in my problem solving skills. But of course, everyone in the team is very collaborative and offers great ideas, initiatives and feedback all the time. I firmly believe the openness, transparency and empathy is the driver to thrive against all odds.

As a closing note, I'm super proud of the little thing I build and the person I become. Life is all about perspectives, so as technology. Instead of pondering upon and indefinitely reflecting on the negatives of tech like a critique, we choose to create something with a positive and humane touch, and that makes me smile.
