---
name: Devin Kenny
year: 2020
link: https://www.devinkenny.info
avatar: /assets/images/2020/devin-kenny.jpg
---
Over the years, individually and sometimes collaboratively, I have done artwork and writing concerned with gentrification, the US prison industrial complex, subcultures and countercultures, alternative histories of the Internet, and the Black Atlantic.

My art practice includes music, sculpture, painting, videos, writing, photography, garments, performances, and even software. In our hope to understand a rapidly changing cultural landscape, there is a gap. In my research, I’m embarking on an account of "cyphering" as a social practice and media technique that emerges in the Caribbean and the Americas by Afrodiasporic peoples. Cyphering is originally a term from HipHop referring to MCs rhyming and beatboxing with one another, showcasing new styles, some of which are later recorded on songs. In cryptography, the cipher is an algorithm functioning as a lock or key. Thrust into new social relations, the Black subject learned and created various social codes for survival, and produced her own. I reflect on the Black analog networks springing from the Americas to deepen understandings of the material and ideological function of contemporary digital networks. 

The research I’m embarking on is a chance to better understand how cultures of the African Diaspora have influenced the Americas and the World, and how that has influenced digital society. I have engaged with the topic with projects that look at the connections between Houston’s Chopped and Screwed music and Monterrey's cumbias rebajadas, and the overlaps between jazz, beat poetry, and folk scenes in 20th century NYC. This current project grew from a performance essay I did at the invitation of the Center For Experimental Lectures which focused on Black/American culture before and after telecommunication technologies, looking at Juneteenth, US quilt codes and Gee’s Bend quilting practices, spray can art, Black Twitter, fractals in architecture and hair braiding in West and Central Africa, Bamana sand divination’s relationship to modern computing, and more.

Creativity is a big part of my life, and through it, I reflect on the things that happen in the world around me -- the things that have impacted me, and the lives of the people I love most. Through art, I share information in a compelling way. I deeply believe in art and the power of culture to help us understand ourselves, and connect with others. Artists have the ability to make all kinds of research findings accessible to wider audiences and to create new models and ways of thinking, encouraging folks to do the same. These are some of the reasons why I have dedicated my life to it.

In NYC shortly after the tragic paradigm shift of the Covid-19 pandemic, I met with Jingxuan Sun and William Jose Leon II virtually and began working on 2 software with support from Cornell Tech’s \Art initiative which offered some creative responses to ongoing issues in contemporary culture. One project is called tohuwabohu (named after the Hebrew term for the time before God said "let there be light" in the Book of Genesis). Tohuwabohu is a non-linear presentation app for sound, video, and image. I initially planned this software as a tool to facilitate me in making performance essays, but then, with the lockdowns limiting the number of live performances, I shifted perspective and see the program as a way to make surprising new kinds of virtual experiences for sharing ideas, affect, and expressions. What I call performance essays are a multimedia performance format that draws from personal narrative, poetry, lecture, live music, video presentation, and performance art to create a unique experience, traversing various topics. The second application: Otherwards, is going to be released as part of a larger project that includes a multimedia album that I have been working on here in Brooklyn and Queens. Otherwards is an Augmented Reality mobile application for experiencing and interacting with sound in a different way. By spatializing various controls, a person has a chance to physically move around, and interact with their media in real time, whether that be turning components on and off, or using special effects to change the sonic character of the compositions. With the loss of live concerts, and upwards of 50,000 songs uploaded daily to platforms like Spotify, I started thinking of other ways to make sound more active and engaging. With all the hardships, one exciting thing coming out of the pandemic has been a rethinking of what community is and the ways it can be cultivated, physically, or in digital spaces.
