---
name: Matthew Weinstein
year: 2016
link: http://www.matthewweinstein.com/
avatar: /assets/images/2016/matthew-weinstein.jpg
---
I began my \Art process by asking a question, ‘what is anti interactivity, or what is the negative space around interactivity?’ Alap, Brandon, and I discussed this for a while, and we decided that anti interactivity is a relationship to a work of art in which involuntary processes like heartbeat and body temperature affect the piece. It was important to us that the readings be gathered from remote sensors so that direct viewer involvement would not be part of the experience. Brandon and Alap designed a system of sensors that could accomplish this. Their job was to then connect the viewer inputs gathered by the sensors to visual aspects of the piece such as light intensity, light color, the animated human figure’s makeup shades, eye color and skin tone and the volumes of the different sound tracks. In the final piece, all of these changes create different colored lens flares and light artifacts that wipe across the screen and are data driven embodiments of the audience. The changes are subtle. The point was not to create a conscious relationship between the viewer and the piece, but rather a subliminal one. Interactivity usually fails art because it makes the connection between viewer and object literal and banal. We created a system that is actually an enhancement of the undefinable relationship between a viewer and an object of contemplation. We created a machine to envision the invisible feedback mechanism between the viewer and the art.

This process was an opportunity to translate an abstract idea into a lived experience. Art has existed as a relationship between the self and technology. As our creative tools deepen, become more seductive, and promise infinite novelty, the danger of the loss of one’s original artistic concept intensifies. We all agreed that the retention of the concept was of primary importance, and how to do that was always part of the discussion.

Just because an industry names something virtual, it doesn’t mean that it invented virtuality. Same with interactivity. The novel, religion, philosophy and art; all these things are virtual and all create interactive mental spaces. Photorealistic 3D rendering, interactive gaming, and VR are just recent instances within the history of perception. We looked at the piece we created more historically than technologically. We created something very subtle, beautiful and mysterious using technology created for the more goal oriented realms of industry and entertainment.

The goal of this program is to set up a feedback loop between the artist and the technologists. One supplies the questions and the other supplies the answers. Then the reverse. And we should all walk away having created something new together. But it’s not easy. For it to succeed there needs to be a clear and attainable goal, the knowledge that technology is not magic, and an openness on everyone's part to be swayed by the process.