---
name: Mika Tajima
year: 2018
link: http://mikatajima.com
avatar: /assets/images/2018/mika-tajima.jpg
---
I have been using various algorithmic and machinic processes in recent work to interrogate how technology is being used to shape our present--our desires, decisions and daily life. I want to target the senses and emotions of the viewer and make them acutely aware of this manipulation. The projects become a metaphor for an existence thoroughly shaped by technology and the soft power that regulates us as subjects from within our psyche. Often working in tandem with direct coercion, this new form of control is immaterial and abstract but also has a palpable presence in our lives. We can feel it shaping our decisions, behaviors, and desires especially when it comes to predictive algorithms we encounter in our everyday and digital life. 

I'm always thinking about how one could escape being scraped, from being detected or coded, how to achieve freedom and this includes being unknowable (i.e. not just a profile or data). During our discussions about the possibilities presented by new technologies, we would also talk about the tension between the notion of "freedom" and control under these new conditions. While new forms of freedom are introduced through harnessing/utilizing technology that allow us to communicate, express ourselves, create new forms, buy things, travel, etc. our data is used knowingly and beyond what we realize or understand.  New forms of control emerge with these new possibilities. 

The question is really: Is escape possible? Would escaping detection look like a moving shadow in a room? Or is it more about obfuscation like hiding within noise? Or maybe something that can only be seen in fleeting moments? As technology seeks to understand human behavior, desires, and who we are, the connection between data and identity formation became the central focus. As Jacob, Christy and I began talking about the fluidity of identity in real-life and how the notions of constant change relates to generative processes in technology, the project began forming around utilizing machine learning in tandem with various clustering algorithms. The technology itself would be a metaphor for perpetual morphing and vehicle for chasing its own shadow. 

We used available data sets that represented robust characteristics of individuals --genomic, biometric and subjective data taken from a DNA testing company, fitness app and dating website. From here, we experimented with various clustering algorithms and GAN processing to "see" these newly produced subjects and their fluid affinities.  
The next question was how this technology would visually manifest. The last step of the project was to invent and connect the algorithmic processes with the material and hardware that would manifest the concept and data output. Fluidity and liquid itself became the material representation—our identities are in continual transformation, with new unknown possibilities, affinities and communities. What I imagined was black pool of magnetic ferrofluid that would move in unnatural ways against nature using the data sent from our customized program. New life emerging from a primordial liquid abyss.